In this video, we'll see how
we can do pass-by-reference
using pointer parameters.
In c++, we can use pointers
and the de-reference operator
to achieve pass-by-reference.
In this case, the function parameter
is a pointer, and the actual
parameter can be a pointer variable
or the address of a variable.
Let's see what this
looks like syntactically.
Here we're declaring a
function prototype and
then defining the function.
The function is called double data.
And it expects a pointer to
an integer as a parameter.
Notice it doesn't return anything.
Instead, it will double the contents
of the data the pointer points to.
So in the body of the function,
we simply de-reference the pointer
and multiply the value points 2
by 2, and assign it right back.
I've written this using a compound
assignment statement, but I've also
written out the long form of the
assignment statement just in case
the compound assignment is confusing.
I also chose to multiply by 2 on
purpose since this uses the asterisk
as the multiplication operator.
Keep them straight, don't
let the syntax confuse you.
In one case, the asterisk is
multiplication, and in the other, it's
indirection or de-reference operator.
Okay, so how do you
call this function.
Let's see that in the next slide.
We know that since the function
parameter is a pointer to an
integer, that means it expects
the address of an integer.
Well, in this case, I have
an integer named value and
it's initialized to 10.
I can call double data with
the address of that integer
using the ampersand, which
is the address of operator.
When I return from the function, I now
display value which has doubled to 20.
Let's head over to the IDE and
see this and other examples of
pass-by-reference with pointers.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE.
And you can see that I'm in
the section 12 workspace in
the passing pointers 1 project.
We'll go over a couple of different
projects that do pass-by-reference
using pointers a little bit
differently from one another.
So you can see exactly what's
happening, and I'll walk
you through these in detail.
You can see here that we've got the
same function that we wrote in the
slides, right here, double data.
It expects a pointer to an integer.
And all it does is it doubles
whatever it's pointing to, right.
So whatever integer is pointing,
it was just doubling it.
And here's my main,
which we're going to run.
We're going to run main
couple different ways.
First, this part right here, and
then the second part right here.
This, you'll see is use the address of
a value, and this is using an actual
pointer, so it's two different ways to
pass really the same information in.
Okay, so let's start running this.
We've got our main, and it's
activated on the stack, right here.
You'll notice main has
two local variables.
It's got an integer value, and
it's got an integer pointer.
So the value is on the stack.
And right now, it's initialized to 10.
And we also have an int pointer,
which is a pointer to an integer.
And right now, it's null and.
I'll just leave it blank.
Let's say that value
is in address 1000.
And in pointer is that address
2000, just to keep things straight.
Okay, so that's where we're at.
Now we're here at
line 16, output value.
Well, what's value?
Well, we just go to the variable
and grab with its contents, right.
So we're going to display a 10
here, just like we have before.
Now we call the function double data,
and we pass in the address of value.
Okay, so main stops what it's
doing, and we transfer control
over to this function up here.
So we're going to call double
data, and we're going to
pass in the address of value.
You can see right here, what's
the address of value, it's a 1000.
So we're gonna pass in
a 1000 to this function.
Okay, that 1000 will get
copied into end pointer.
So that function right here has a
local variable, called int pointer.
And you can see that guy right there.
Notice it's the same
name as this variable.
That's okay, we can use the same
name for different variables.
These are two different variables
and two different scopes.
Okay, so we're passing
in a 1000 to it.
So that's what we're doing.
There's our pointer.
So now that int pointer
is pointing to this value,
right here at address 1000.
So what do we do now?
Well, we're going to double
that value basically.
So let me write this out longhand
here, so we'll de-reference int
pointer on the left-hand side
equals again the reference int
pointer times 2, and that's what
this compound assignment is doing.
Notice that, that asterisk
right there is multiplication.
These asterisks here, that's
the the reference operator.
Keep them straight. It doesn't matter that you're
asked, just look at the context,
and it should be pretty clear.
All right, so let's execute this.
De-reference in pointer follow
the point to where it's pointing,
right here I got a 10, multiply
that by 2, gives me the 20.
And we're assigning 20 into
wherever int pointer is pointing.
Well, int pointer is
pointing to a 1000.
So we just change that 10 to a 20.
Okay, at this point, that
function is done, so we're
going to clean up the stack.
This activation gets popped off
the stack, so this is all gone now.
There you go.
Now we're back to main.
And we output the value.
The value is now 20, and we're
done with that function call.
Okay, so now let's keep going.
We're here now.
We're going to output
a bunch of lines.
And then we're setting int
pointer to the address of value.
Well, int pointer was null before.
Remember, we nulled it out right here.
So at this point, int pointer
now is the address of value.
What's the address of value?
It's a 1000.
So it's a 1000.
There's my pointer.
I'm pointing to value so.
What do I do now?
I call double data again.
So let's call double data.
And what are we passing
into it this time?
Int pointer.
Well, what's the value of int pointer?
A 1000.
So we're calling this with a 1000,
which is the address of some integer.
So we activate that on the
that activation record, and
it's got that same local
variable, right, int pointer.
That's this guy right up here,
and we're copying a 1000 in.
There's the pointer,
same as we had before.
So what do we do now?
We execute this code.
It now changes this 20 to a 40.
Okay, when the function is done,
we clean up our stack, we pop that
activation record off the stack.
So this pointer is gone.
And then we come right back to
main, and we say output to value.
Well, the value is now 40.
Okay, so there you go.
This is how pass-by-reference
with pointers works.
It's really pretty straightforward.
Let's execute this code now, and
you'll see the result is -- and I'll
slide this over just a little bit,
you can see value here was 10, then
we doubled it to 20, then we called
it again and doubled it again to 40.
All right, perfect.
So let's take a look
at another example now.
Okay, so here's another example.
I'm in the same workspace, section 12.
Now I'm in the
passingPointers2 project.
And what I've done here is I've
written a swap function, that
basically swaps 2 variables, 2
integer variables in this case.
And here's my main that exercises it.
So let's let's try this out.
Here's my main.
As usual, here's the stack.
Main has 2 local variables.
It's got x and it's got y.
X is initialized to 100,
and y is initialized to 200.
Let's assume that desired
address is 1000 and 2000.
So we've got some nice
easy numbers to work with.
Okay, so right here,
we're outputting what's x?
We're putting a new line in
front of x, but that's okay.
What's x?
Well, x is 100.
So we're going to display 100 here.
And now we're going to
say, well, what's y?
We're going to output the value
of y which is 200, pretty easy.
Now main stops what it's doing, and
we transfer control over to swap.
Okay, so we're going to call swap.
And you'll notice swap
has 3 local variables.
It's got an a, it's got
a b, and it's got a temp.
So we need to allocate storage
for all of those on the activation
record on the stack, right.
So we've got a, we've got
b, and we've got temp.
In this case, a and b are both
pointers to integers and temp
is just a regular integer.
Okay, so we're going to call swap with
the address of x and the address of y.
The address of x is a 1000,
and the address of y is 2000.
So that's what the
call looks like, right.
Now this x, right here, right,
gets mapped to that parameter
a, so that's what we're doing.
We're copying that value to a.
So a is now going to be.
What x is right here, right.
So a is going to get a
1000, and b will get 2000.
So here are your pointers.
B is pointing right here, and
a is pointing right there.
All right, so now let's
start executing this code.
Temp, we're assigning
what a points to, to temp.
Well, what is a point to?
We know it points to an
integer, right, because
this is an integer pointer.
So we're gonna take the
integer that a points to.
Let's follow a, it points to a 100.
And we're storing it in temp.
Temp is an integer, not a pointer.
Okay, so that's done.
Now we're going to execute
the second one which says,
take what b is pointing to.
All right, let's follow b.
B is pointing to 200, and put
it into where a was pointing.
Okay, a was pointing here.
So we're going to put the 200 here.
So that's done.
And then we'll take the temp,
which was 100 right here.
And we're going to put it
into where b was pointing.
So b was pointing to here.
So we're going to put the 100 here.
Notice those two
integers got swapped now.
Okay, so at this point,
the function's done.
What do we do?
We clean up the stack, we pop
off that activation record.
All this is now gone.
And we just clean these up as well.
And that's where we're at right now.
So we're back in main now.
What's x?
We print out, the value of x is 200.
And we display the value of
y right here, which is 100.
Notice that we actually
swapped those variables.
Okay, so that's really what's
going on with pass-by-reference
with pointers in this example.
It's pretty straightforward.
If you remember, we did
this with references.
References is probably
what you'd want to do here.
But I'll talk about using references
versus pointers in the very last
video in this section, that gives you
some insight as to what to use when.
But there you go.
This is how you do it with pointers.
Let's look at another example now.
Okay, so I've switched over to
the PassingPointers3 project
in the section 12 workspace.
In this case, we're going to pass a
pointer to a vector rather than using
integers as we've done in the past.
And there's a couple of examples
in this main, and I'll leave the
second example here that's commented
out for after I do this one.
So this is what I've got.
I've got a real simple function
here called display, and it expects
a pointer to a vector of string.
So it expects the address of
some vector that holds strings.
Okay, And all it's doing is just
looping through the vector and
printing out all the strings in it.
I'm not going to draw
the stack out now.
I think this is going to be
pretty easy to follow now that.
I've done over all those examples.
So in this case, I've got
a vector of string objects.
It's called stooges, and here's
the 3 stooges: larry Moe and Curly.
So what have I got, I've
basically got a vector object.
And it's got 3 strings:
Larry Moe and Curly.
It's called stooges, and it
exists at location 1000 on the
stack there, okay, in the main
in mains activation record.
Then I'm just calling stooges here.
I'm calling display, and I'm
passing in the address of stooges.
Perfect.
So now once I'm here in this
display function that you see here
on line 7, once I'm here, all I
want to do is display all those
strings that are in the vector.
So I'm going to use a range base for
loop that just iterates through the
vector and prints out the strings.
Well, I have a pointer.
Here's my v, right.
And v has a 1000 in it.
So this is v, right
here, it's pointing.
V is not the vector again.
V is just a simple pointer.
So in order to get to what
the pointer is pointing to,
I de-reference the pointer.
That's what I need to do.
So if I de-reference v, I've got
this stooges vector right here.
And that's what's
going on right there.
So for auto, which is a string, right.
So for every string in the collection.
Well, the collection is not v,
these the pointer to the collection.
So if I de-reference v,
I get the collection.
And this executes just
like you would expect.
Okay, now let me clear this
out, and I'll run it real
quick so that we can test this.
And there you see: Larry Moe
and Curly
being displayed by this function right here.
Now in this case, we really
don't want this display
function to modify stuff, right.
I mean it's only displaying
vector elements, we don't
want it modifying anything.
So we could get this
to modify something.
That's not what we want to
do, but we certainly could.
To remember that we could do the
at method of the vector class,
well, we could simply do star v,
right, de-reference this pointer,
that gives me the vector, then
I could say .at 0 equals funny.
And what that will do Is
it'll change the first vector
element, Larry to Funny.
Notice the syntax.
The syntax may be a little strange.
But think about this, this
is very logical, right.
If i de-reference the
pointer, I get the vector.
And then once I have the
vector, I can do .at, .size
whatever else I need on it.
So this sets that to funny.
I could also come over here
and do something like v,
which is the pointer, right.
There's null pointer.
So now I'm not pointing anywhere.
So if I do both of these,
you can see that this will
compile just fine and run.
Now if I move this to the top
right there, now I'm actually going
to change that vector element.
So when I run it, you'll see
funny now instead of Larry,
you see that right there.
So this is not something
you want to happen, right.
It's a display function.
It shouldn't be messing around with
the vector that you're pointing to.
So in this case, we could
use the const qualifier here,
right, that will prevent this
from happening right there.
So if I do this now, I'll get
a compiler error right there.
You can see the red arrow saying,
hey you're telling me that,
that vector I'm pointing to is
constant, you can't mess with it,
you just tried to mess with it.
So that won't be allowed.
And if I put a const here, then
this line 13 won't be allowed.
I'll try to compile that,
and there's the error.
Because now you're telling me
that the pointer is constant, but
you just tried to change it here.
Okay, so again that's not
what you want to do here.
All right, so now it's a
lot safer this function.
We can't change the vector, and we
can't change the pointer either.
So let's look at one last quick
example, and I'll clear this out.
And what we've got now
is let me close this up.
We've got another function
called display because we're
using function overloading here.
Remember, we can use the same name
for the for two different functions.
And let me comment this piece out, and
I'll uncomment this piece right here.
Okay, so in this case, I have
an array of scores, right,
which is an array of integers.
And I've set them all to these scores,
and I've got a negative 1 at the end.
In this case, the negative
1 is a sentinel.
This is where I want
to stop processing.
So what I'm doing in this display
function here is I'm passing in the
address of that first integer and the
sentinel, where do I want to stop.
And you can see what this is doing,
it's saying while what I'm pointing
to right there is not equal to the
sentinel, which, in this case, is -1.
Then process what I'm doing, right.
So I'm going to basically
de-reference that array, display a
100 and then increment the array,
the pointer to the next element.
So think about what's going on here.
Here's the array.
And let's just put a few numbers
in here: 100 98 97 79 85 and -1.
I might have missed
one, but that's okay.
So at this point,
that's my scores array.
This is scores.
This is, let's say,
address 1000, right.
Perfect.
So now I'm passing in scores.
So now my array variable in the
function points right there.
And my sentinel is -1.
All right, so am I
pointing to negative 1?
No, I'm not.
I'm pointing to a 100.
All right, print out 100,
and increment the pointer.
Where's the pointer pointing to?
Well, now the pointer is
going to point here, not here.
So now we're going to loop
again and print out a 98.
And we're going to keep
doing that until we hit -1.
So this is going to print 98 97
79 85 and then it's going to stop.
In this case, we could pass in
constant for the array, right.
We're pointing to these numbers,
we don't want to change it.
But we are actually
updating the pointer here.
So we can't have a
constant pointer, right.
We can have constant a pointer
constant integers, but not a
constant pointers because we're
actually changing the pointer.
This is something, in this
example here, that you
can't do with references.
You've really got to use pointers
to do this kind of stuff.
Okay, so that wraps up this video.
There you see a couple of
different examples of pass
by value with pointers.
At this point, you might be
thinking do I use pointers, do I
use references, how do I do this?
Stay tuned. In the last video in this
section, I'll tell you exactly
when you should use pointers and
when you should use references.